README.md, before:

![Logo](aMeta.png)

# aMeta: an accurate and memory-efficient ancient Metagenomic profiling workflow

[![Snakemake](https://img.shields.io/badge/snakemake-≥6.10.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://snakemake.bitbucket.io)
[![Tests](https://github.com/NBISweden/ancient-microbiome-smk/actions/workflows/main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/NBISweden/ancient-microbiome-smk/actions/workflows/main.yaml)

## About

aMeta is a Snakemake workflow for identifying microbial sequences in ancient DNA shotgun metagenomics samples. The workflow performs:

- trimming adapter sequences and removing reads shorter than 30 bp with Cutadapt
- quaity control before and after trimming with FastQC and MultiQC
- taxonomic sequence kmer-based classification with KrakenUniq
- sequence alignment with Bowtie2 and screening for common microbial pathogens
- deamination pattern analysis with MapDamage2
- Lowest Common Ancestor (LCA) sequence alignment with Malt
- authentication and validation of identified microbial species with MaltExtract

When using aMeta and / or pre-built databases provided together with the wokflow for your research projects, please cite our preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.03.510579v1

## Authors

* Nikolay Oskolkov (@LeandroRitter) nikolay.oskolkov@scilifelab.se
* Claudio Mirabello (@clami66) claudio.mirabello@scilifelab.se
* Per Unneberg (@percyfal) per.unneberg@scilifelab.se

## Installation

Clone the repository, then create and activate aMeta conda environment:

    git clone https://github.com/NBISweden/aMeta
    cd aMeta
    conda env create -f workflow/envs/environment.yaml
    # alternatively: mamba env create -f workflow/envs/environment.yaml
    conda activate aMeta

Run a test to make sure that the workflow was installed correctly:

    cd .test
    ./runtest.sh -j 20

Here, and below, by `-j` you can specify the number of threads that the workflow can use.

## Quick start

To run the worflow you need to prepare a tab-delimited sample-file `config/samples.tsv` with at least two columns, and a configuration file `config/config.yaml`, below we provide examples for both files. 

Here is an example of `samples.tsv`, this implies that the fastq-files are located in `aMeta/data` folder:

    sample	fastq
    foo	data/foo.fq.gz
    bar	data/bar.fq.gz

Below is an example of `config.yaml`, here you will need to download a few databases that we made public (or build databases yourself).

    samplesheet: "config/samples.tsv"

    # KrakenUniq Microbial NCBI NT database (if you are interested in prokaryotes only)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.20518251
    krakenuniq_db: resources/DBDIR_KrakenUniq_MicrobialNT

    # KrakenUniq full NCBI NT database (if you are interested in prokaryotes and eukaryotes)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.20205504
    #krakenuniq_db: resources/DBDIR_KrakenUniq_Full_NT

    # Bowtie2 index and helping files for following up microbial pathogens 
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21185887
    bowtie2_patho_db: resources/library.pathogen.fna
    pathogenomesFound: resources/pathogensFound.very_inclusive.tab
    pathogenome_seqid2taxid_db: resources/seqid2taxid.pathogen.map

    # Bowtie2 index for full NCBI NT (for quick followup of prokaryotes and eukaryotes)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21070063
    #bowtie2_patho_db: resources/library.fna

    # Helping files for building Malt database 
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21070063
    malt_nt_fasta: resources/library.fna
    malt_seqid2taxid_db: resources/seqid2taxid.map.orig
    malt_accession2taxid: resources/nucl_gb.accession2taxid

    # A path for downloading NCBI taxonomy files (performed automatically)
    # you do not need to change this line
    ncbi_db: resources/ncbi

    # Breadth and depth of coverage filters 
    # default thresholds are very conservative, can be tuned by users
    n_unique_kmers: 1000
    n_tax_reads: 200


After you have prepared the sample- and configration-file, please install job-specific environments and update Krona taxonomy:

    cd aMeta
    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile --use-conda --conda-create-envs-only -j 20
    env=$(grep krona .snakemake/conda/*yaml | awk '{print $1}' | sed -e "s/.yaml://g" | head -1)
    cd $env/opt/krona/
    ./updateTaxonomy.sh taxonomy
    cd -

Finally, the workflow can be run using the following command line:

    cd aMeta
    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile --use-conda -j 20


In the next sections we will give more information about configuration options as well as instructions on how to run the workflow in a computer cluster enviroment.


## More configuration options

Within `config.yaml` one can specify what samples to analyse in the `samples` section through the `include` and `exclude` keys, so that a global samplesheet can be reused multiple times.

Analyses `mapdamage`, `authentication`, `malt`, and `krona` can be individually turned on and off in the `analyses` section.

Adapter sequences can be defined in the `adapters` section of `config.yaml`. 
The keys `config['adapters']['illumina']` (default `true`) and `config['adapters']['nextera']` (default `false`) are switches
that turn on/off adapter trimming of illumina (`AGATCGGAAGAG`) and nextera (`AGATCGGAAGAG`) adapter sequences. Addional custom adapter sequences can be set in the configuration key
`config['adapters']['custom']` which must be an array of strings.

An example snippet that can optionally be added to the configuration file `config.yaml` is shown below:

    # you can include or exclude samples
    samples:
      include:
        - foo
      exclude:
        - bar

    # you can include or exclude certain types of analysis
    analyses:
      mapdamage: true
      authentication: true
      malt: true
      krona: true

    # you can specify type of adapters to trim
    adapters:
      illumina: true
      nextera: false
      # custom is a list of adapter sequences
      custom: []


## Environment module configuration

To run the workflow in a computer cluster environemnt you should specify environmental modules and runtimes via `--profile` as follows:

    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile -j 100 --profile .profile --use-envmodules

If the workflow is run on a HPC with the `--use-envmodules` option
(see
[using-environment-modules](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/deployment.html#using-environment-modules)),
the workflow will check for an additional file that configures environment modules. By default, the file is `config/envmodules.yaml`, but a custom location can be set with the
environment variable `ANCIENT_MICROBIOME_ENVMODULES`.

Environmental modules configurations are placed in a configuration section
`envmodules` with key-value pairs that map a dependency set to a list
of environment modules. The dependency sets are named after the rule's
corresponding conda environment file, such that a dependency set may
affect multiple rules. For instance, the following example shows how
to define modules for rules depending on fastqc, as it would be
implemented on the [uppmax](https://uppmax.uu.se/) compute cluster:

    envmodules:
      fastqc:
        - bioinfo-tools
        - FastQC

See the configuration schema file
(`workflows/schema/config.schema.yaml`) for more information.

## Runtime configuration

Most individual rules define the number of threads to run. Although
the number of threads for a given rule can be tweaked on the command
line via the option `--set-threads`, it is advisable to put all
runtime configurations in a
[profile](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/best_practices.html).
At its simplest, a profile is a directory (e.g. `.profile` in the
working directory) containing a file `config.yaml` which consists of
command line option settings. In addition to customizing threads, it
enables the customization of resources, such as runtime and memory. An
example is shown here:

    # Rerun incomplete jobs
    rerun-incomplete: true
    # Restart jobs once on failure
    restart-times: 1
    # Set threads for mapping and fastqc
    set-threads:
      - Bowtie2_Pathogenome_Alignment=10
      - FastQC_BeforeTrimming=5
    # Set resources (runtime in minutes, memory in mb) for malt
    set-resources:
      - Malt:runtime=7200
      - Malt:mem_mb=512000
    # Set defalt resources that apply to all rules
    default-resources:
      - runtime=120
      - mem_mb=16000
      - disk_mb=1000000

For more advanced profiles for different hpc systems, see [Snakemake-Profiles github page](https://github.com/snakemake-profiles).

## Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

### I get "Java heap space error" on the Malt step, what should I do?

You will need to adjust Malt max memory usage (64 GB by default) via modifying `malt-build.vmoptions` and `malt-run.vmoptions` files. 
To locate these files you have to find a Malt conda environment, activate it and replace the default 64 GB with the amount of RAM available on you computer node, in the example below it is 512 GB:

        cd aMeta
        env=$(grep hops .snakemake/conda/*yaml | awk '{print $1}' | sed -e "s/.yaml://g" | head -1)
        conda activate $env
        version=$(conda list malt --json | grep version | sed -e "s/\"//g" | awk '{print $2}')
        cd $env/opt/malt-$version
        sed -i -e "s/-Xmx64G/-Xmx512G/" malt-build.vmoptions
        sed -i -e "s/-Xmx64G/-Xmx512G/" malt-run.vmoptions
        cd -
        conda deactivate

Commit message:

added more threads to fastqc and new info to README

README.md, after:

![Logo](aMeta.png)

# aMeta: an accurate and memory-efficient ancient Metagenomic profiling workflow

[![Snakemake](https://img.shields.io/badge/snakemake-≥6.10.0-brightgreen.svg)](https://snakemake.bitbucket.io)
[![Tests](https://github.com/NBISweden/ancient-microbiome-smk/actions/workflows/main.yaml/badge.svg)](https://github.com/NBISweden/ancient-microbiome-smk/actions/workflows/main.yaml)

## About

aMeta is a Snakemake workflow for identifying microbial sequences in ancient DNA shotgun metagenomics samples. The workflow performs:

- trimming adapter sequences and removing reads shorter than 30 bp with Cutadapt
- quaity control before and after trimming with FastQC and MultiQC
- taxonomic sequence kmer-based classification with KrakenUniq
- sequence alignment with Bowtie2 and screening for common microbial pathogens
- deamination pattern analysis with MapDamage2
- Lowest Common Ancestor (LCA) sequence alignment with Malt
- authentication and validation of identified microbial species with MaltExtract

When using aMeta and / or pre-built databases provided together with the wokflow for your research projects, please cite our preprint: https://www.biorxiv.org/content/10.1101/2022.10.03.510579v1

## Authors

* Nikolay Oskolkov (@LeandroRitter) nikolay.oskolkov@scilifelab.se
* Claudio Mirabello (@clami66) claudio.mirabello@scilifelab.se
* Per Unneberg (@percyfal) per.unneberg@scilifelab.se

## Installation

Clone the repository, then create and activate aMeta conda environment (here an below `cd aMeta` implies navigating to the cloned root aMeta directory):

    git clone https://github.com/NBISweden/aMeta
    cd aMeta
    conda env create -f workflow/envs/environment.yaml
    # alternatively: mamba env create -f workflow/envs/environment.yaml
    conda activate aMeta

Run a test to make sure that the workflow was installed correctly:

    cd .test
    ./runtest.sh -j 20

Here, and below, by `-j` you can specify the number of threads that the workflow can use.

## Quick start

To run the worflow you need to prepare a tab-delimited sample-file `config/samples.tsv` with at least two columns, and a configuration file `config/config.yaml`, below we provide examples for both files. 

Here is an example of `samples.tsv`, this implies that the fastq-files are located in `aMeta/data` folder:

    sample	fastq
    foo	data/foo.fq.gz
    bar	data/bar.fq.gz

Below is an example of `config.yaml`, here you will need to download a few databases that we made public (or build databases yourself).

    samplesheet: "config/samples.tsv"

    # KrakenUniq Microbial NCBI NT database (if you are interested in prokaryotes only)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.20518251
    krakenuniq_db: resources/DBDIR_KrakenUniq_MicrobialNT

    # KrakenUniq full NCBI NT database (if you are interested in prokaryotes and eukaryotes)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.20205504
    #krakenuniq_db: resources/DBDIR_KrakenUniq_Full_NT

    # Bowtie2 index and helping files for following up microbial pathogens 
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21185887
    bowtie2_patho_db: resources/library.pathogen.fna
    pathogenomesFound: resources/pathogensFound.very_inclusive.tab
    pathogenome_seqid2taxid_db: resources/seqid2taxid.pathogen.map

    # Bowtie2 index for full NCBI NT (for quick followup of prokaryotes and eukaryotes)
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21070063
    #bowtie2_patho_db: resources/library.fna

    # Helping files for building Malt database 
    # can be downloaded from https://doi.org/10.17044/scilifelab.21070063
    malt_nt_fasta: resources/library.fna
    malt_seqid2taxid_db: resources/seqid2taxid.map.orig
    malt_accession2taxid: resources/nucl_gb.accession2taxid

    # A path for downloading NCBI taxonomy files (performed automatically)
    # you do not need to change this line
    ncbi_db: resources/ncbi

    # Breadth and depth of coverage filters 
    # default thresholds are very conservative, can be tuned by users
    n_unique_kmers: 1000
    n_tax_reads: 200


After you have prepared the sample- and configration-file, please install job-specific environments and update Krona taxonomy:

    cd aMeta
    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile --use-conda --conda-create-envs-only -j 20
    env=$(grep krona .snakemake/conda/*yaml | awk '{print $1}' | sed -e "s/.yaml://g" | head -1)
    cd $env/opt/krona/
    ./updateTaxonomy.sh taxonomy
    cd -

Finally, the workflow can be run using the following command line:

    cd aMeta
    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile --use-conda -j 20


In the next sections we will give more information about configuration options as well as instructions on how to run the workflow in a computer cluster enviroment.


## More configuration options

Within `config.yaml` one can specify what samples to analyse in the `samples` section through the `include` and `exclude` keys, so that a global samplesheet can be reused multiple times.

Analyses `mapdamage`, `authentication`, `malt`, and `krona` can be individually turned on and off in the `analyses` section.

Adapter sequences can be defined in the `adapters` section of `config.yaml`. 
The keys `config['adapters']['illumina']` (default `true`) and `config['adapters']['nextera']` (default `false`) are switches
that turn on/off adapter trimming of illumina (`AGATCGGAAGAG`) and nextera (`AGATCGGAAGAG`) adapter sequences. Addional custom adapter sequences can be set in the configuration key
`config['adapters']['custom']` which must be an array of strings.

An example snippet that can optionally be added to the configuration file `config.yaml` is shown below:

    # you can include or exclude samples
    samples:
      include:
        - foo
      exclude:
        - bar

    # you can include or exclude certain types of analysis
    analyses:
      mapdamage: true
      authentication: true
      malt: true
      krona: true

    # you can specify type of adapters to trim
    adapters:
      illumina: true
      nextera: false
      # custom is a list of adapter sequences
      custom: []


## Environment module configuration

To run the workflow in a computer cluster environemnt you should specify environmental modules and runtimes via `--profile` as follows:

    snakemake --snakefile workflow/Snakefile -j 100 --profile .profile --use-envmodules

If the workflow is run on a HPC with the `--use-envmodules` option
(see
[using-environment-modules](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/deployment.html#using-environment-modules)),
the workflow will check for an additional file that configures environment modules. By default, the file is `config/envmodules.yaml`, but a custom location can be set with the
environment variable `ANCIENT_MICROBIOME_ENVMODULES`.

Environmental modules configurations are placed in a configuration section
`envmodules` with key-value pairs that map a dependency set to a list
of environment modules. The dependency sets are named after the rule's
corresponding conda environment file, such that a dependency set may
affect multiple rules. For instance, the following example shows how
to define modules for rules depending on fastqc, as it would be
implemented on the [uppmax](https://uppmax.uu.se/) compute cluster:

    envmodules:
      fastqc:
        - bioinfo-tools
        - FastQC

See the configuration schema file
(`workflows/schema/config.schema.yaml`) for more information.

## Runtime configuration

Most individual rules define the number of threads to run. Although
the number of threads for a given rule can be tweaked on the command
line via the option `--set-threads`, it is advisable to put all
runtime configurations in a
[profile](https://snakemake.readthedocs.io/en/stable/snakefiles/best_practices.html).
At its simplest, a profile is a directory (e.g. `.profile` in the
working directory) containing a file `config.yaml` which consists of
command line option settings. In addition to customizing threads, it
enables the customization of resources, such as runtime and memory. An
example is shown here:

    # Rerun incomplete jobs
    rerun-incomplete: true
    # Restart jobs once on failure
    restart-times: 1
    # Set threads for mapping and fastqc
    set-threads:
      - Bowtie2_Pathogenome_Alignment=10
      - FastQC_BeforeTrimming=5
    # Set resources (runtime in minutes, memory in mb) for malt
    set-resources:
      - Malt:runtime=7200
      - Malt:mem_mb=512000
    # Set defalt resources that apply to all rules
    default-resources:
      - runtime=120
      - mem_mb=16000
      - disk_mb=1000000

For more advanced profiles for different hpc systems, see [Snakemake-Profiles github page](https://github.com/snakemake-profiles).

## Frequently Asked Questions (FAQ)

### My fastq-files do not contain adapters, how can I skip the adapter removal step?

From our experinece, there are very often adapter traces left even after an adapter removing software has been applied to the raw fastq-files. 
Therefore, we strongly recommend not to skip the adapter removing step. This step is typically not time consuming and can only be benificial for the analysis.
Otherwise, adapter contamination can lead to severe biases in microbial discovery.

### I get "Java heap space error" on the Malt step, what should I do?

You will need to adjust Malt max memory usage (64 GB by default) via modifying `malt-build.vmoptions` and `malt-run.vmoptions` files. 
To locate these files you have to find a Malt conda environment, activate it and replace the default 64 GB with the amount of RAM available on you computer node, in the example below it is 512 GB:

        cd aMeta
        env=$(grep hops .snakemake/conda/*yaml | awk '{print $1}' | sed -e "s/.yaml://g" | head -1)
        conda activate $env
        version=$(conda list malt --json | grep version | sed -e "s/\"//g" | awk '{print $2}')
        cd $env/opt/malt-$version
        sed -i -e "s/-Xmx64G/-Xmx512G/" malt-build.vmoptions
        sed -i -e "s/-Xmx64G/-Xmx512G/" malt-run.vmoptions
        cd -
        conda deactivate

### I get "Java heap space error" on the FastQC step, what should I do?

Similarly to Malt, see above, you will need to modify the default memory usage of FastQC. An example of how this can be done is demonstrated below:

        cd aMeta
        env=$(grep fastqc .snakemake/conda/*yaml | awk '{print $1}' | sed -e "s/.yaml://g" | head -1)
        conda activate $env
        version=$(conda list fastqc --json | grep version | sed -e "s/\"//g" | awk '{print $2}')
        cd $env/opt/fastqc-$version
        sed -i -e "s/-Xmx250m/-Xmx10g/" fastqc
        cd -
        conda deactivate
